# Theoretical Prerequisites

The **VIIRS** instrument observes and collects global satellite observations that span the visible and infrared wavelengths across land, ocean, and atmosphere. VIIRS is one of five instruments onboard the **Suomi National Polar-orbiting Partnership (NPP)**. SNPP serves as a bridge between the Earth Observing System (EOS) satellites and the next-generation of NASA-NOAA Joint Polar Satellite System (JPSS) series of satellites (renamed to NOAA-series).  Climatologists use VIIRS data to improve our understanding of global climate change.

**NetCDF** (Network Common Data Form) is a set of software libraries and machine-independent data formats that support the creation, access, and sharing of array-oriented scientific data. It is also a community standard for sharing scientific data. It is a widely used file format and set of software libraries designed to store and manage large scientific datasets. It is especially popular in Earth sciences, including fields like meteorology, oceanography, and remote sensing, due to its ability to handle multi-dimensional data efficiently.

The **M13 band** of the VIIRS sensor, is a part of the mid-infrared or thermal infrared spectrum, which is sensitive to heat emmisions, as fire emmits strong radiation. Radiance is the measure of intensity of radiation emitted or reflected by a surface, measured in units *W/m²·sr·μm*. The Earth view radiance refers to the radiance detected by the satellite sensor as it looks down at Earth's surface. VIIRS has 22 spectral bands, which are categorized as Visible, Neaf-Infrared and more.

A **band** refers to a specific range of wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum that a satellite sensor is designed to detect. Each band collects information about the Earth's surface and atmosphere by measuring the energy (radiance) within its wavelength range. In **M13** band's case, potential fire pixels (hotspots) are pixels where the “Earth view radiance” in the spectral region between 3.973 μm and 4.128 μm.

VIIRS sensor collects data by sweeping (or scanning) across the Earth's surface as the satellite moves along its orbital path. Each sweep or scan captures a slice of the Earth's surface called a **scan line**. The number of lines on the X-axis represents the sequential order of these scans as the satellite moves forward. We have 3232 scan lines, with 3200 pixels each. This creates a segment of 3200 pixels X 3232 scan lines (MODIS for examples granules 2030 pixels X 1354 scan lines).

In the context of satellites the **spatial resolution** indicates the physical size of each pixel in the satellite image, representing the ground area. In the case of the 375 m VIIRS fire product, each pixel corresponds to a square area approximately 375 meters by 375 meters on the Earth's surface. The VIIRS instrument has multiple spatial resolutions for its data products. The 375 m resolution is achieved by using the I-bands (Imager bands) of VIIRS, which are higher-resolution channels compared to the 750 m resolution achieved by the M-bands (Moderate-resolution bands). The 375 m resolution allows for improved detection of smaller and lower-intensity fires and better spatial detail in mapping fire locations and affected areas.

**Convex Hull** is a polygon that encloses all of the points. An **alpha shape** is a flexible boundary around a set of points, created by removing edges from the Delaunay triangulation based on a parameter α; smaller α values yield tighter, more concave boundaries, while larger values approximate the convex hull. Really insightful visualization [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-XCVn73p3xs).